Add a cluster api overview (#2101)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/advanced/cluster-management/new-cluster-api/index.md

---
linkTitle: The new Cluster API
title: The new Cluster API

> description: Benefits of the new Cluster API (based on CAPI)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Benefits of using the new Cluster API (CAPI) to manage cluster infrastructure in comparison to our Vintage model
```

weight: 5
menu:
  main:
    parent: advanced-cluster-management
user_questions:
  - What kind of changes are coming with the new Cluster API (CAPI)?
  - What are the benefits of Cluster API (CAPI)?
last_review_date: 2024-01-26
owner:

>   - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-phoenix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-phoenix
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-turtles
```

---

{{< platform_support_table aws="ga=v21.0.0,ga=v21.0.0" azure="ga=v21.0.0" >}}

> ## Embracing Kubernetes Cluster API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Embracing Kubernetes Cluster API

```

### A Journey to a Unified Cluster Management Platform

> Two years ago, we embarked on a significant journey to transition our Kubernetes cluster management infrastructure from our own custom operators to the upstream Cluster API (CAPI) implementation. This decision was driven by a number of compelling factors, including the broader adoption and development of CAPI within the Kubernetes community, its ability to provide greater flexibility and configurability, and its commitment to future-proofing our platform.

Reviewer 2: > Two years ago [...]

The history of where we came from and how we evolved belongs into a blog article, while it's irrelevant and too verbose for customer documentation. There have been a multitude of long prose in documentation and we've cleaned those up as good as possible until now. Let's keep the docs concise and on point, i.e. focusing on what we want to achieve with this new page. I'd actually say it would be great to package some parts into a blog article and thereby present the new documentation and CAPI implementation.

But probably a blog article shouldn't point to a `docs.giantswarm.io/*advanced*/...` link. Probably this page rather fits into `/platform-overview` than `/advanced`?! Particularly, we already have a [page that describes the different implementations](https://docs.giantswarm.io/platform-overview/cluster-management/cloud-provider-implementations/), and if we keep _this_ short, we could fit it there, or provide it side-by-side as a CAPI-specific page. At that location, the goal is to draw new potential customers to the benefits of this open source based implementation, and also describe it well for onboarding/existing customers for the purpose of migration. If detailed history is of any relevance to a handful of existing customers (new customers shouldn't care what the vintage implementation was about), the link to the blog article would suffice.

Author: @AndiDog good point. I'd split this into a blog post and CAPI documentation.

Reviewer: +1 this should be in the platform overview (it is not a guide or tutorial)

## Motivations for Transitioning to CAPI

>  * **Community-Driven Development**: CAPI is a widely adopted and actively developed project within the Kubernetes community. By embracing CAPI, we benefit from the collective expertise of many contributors, ensuring the continued advancement and reliability of our cluster management solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Community-Driven Development**: CAPI is a widely adopted and actively developed project within the Kubernetes community. By embracing CAPI, we benefit from the collective expertise of many contributors, ensuring the continued advancement and reliability of our cluster management solution.
```

>  * **Vendor-Neutrality and Future-Proofing**: CAPI adheres to a neutral and open API, shielding our customers from vendor lock-in and ensuring their ability to seamlessly integrate with the evolving cloud landscape. This open approach also facilitates faster innovation and integration with new technologies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Vendor-Neutrality and Future-Proofing**: CAPI adheres to a neutral and open API, shielding our customers from vendor lock-in and ensuring their ability to seamlessly integrate with the evolving cloud landscape. This open approach also facilitates faster innovation and integration with new technologies.
```

>  * **Greater Flexibility and Customization**: CAPI provides a more expressive and flexible API for defining and managing Kubernetes clusters. With CAPI, we can cater to diverse customer requirements, enabling them to deploy into existing infrastructure and customize cluster configurations to suit their specific needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Greater Flexibility and Customization**: CAPI provides a more expressive and flexible API for defining and managing Kubernetes clusters. With CAPI, we can cater to diverse customer requirements, enabling them to deploy into existing infrastructure and customize cluster configurations to suit their specific needs.
```

>  * **Expanded Tooling Ecosystem**: CAPI is compatible with a vast array of tools and solutions developed by the community. By adopting CAPI, we gain access to a rich toolkit for cluster management, automation, and orchestration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Expanded Tooling Ecosystem**: CAPI is compatible with a vast array of tools and solutions developed by the community. By adopting CAPI, we gain access to a rich toolkit for cluster management, automation, and orchestration.
```

> ## Benefits of CAPI

Reviewer: I see the benefits are quite similar to the motivations above. If we want to describe separately what motivations drive us as a company to do the transition to CAPI and what are the benefits to our customers as opposed we could try to be more specific. I will try to suggest something

* **Future-Proofed API**: CAPI's open and vendor-neutral API ensures our platform's viability in the long term, allowing us to adapt to evolving cloud architectures and technologies without being constrained by proprietary solutions.
* **Broad Tooling Compatibility**: Leveraging CAPI allows us to leverage a multitude of tools developed by the community, enhancing our ability to automate, manage, and orchestrate Kubernetes clusters effectively.
* **Support for Managed Control Planes**: CAPI enables us to seamlessly integrate with managed control planes like EKS and AKS, providing customers with a choice of deployment options.
* **Simplified Provider Addition**: CAPI's composable architecture makes it easier to add new infrastructure providers, expanding our offerings beyond AWS, Azure, and our current on-premises solutions.
* **Multi-Cloud Capabilities**: CAPI supports managing workload clusters from multiple providers under a single management cluster, enabling true multi-cloud deployment scenarios.

> ## Differences between CAPI and Legacy Cluster Management

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Differences between CAPI and Vintage Cluster Management
```
We always refer to our current product as Vintage

Author: Imo the word "vintage" is confusing in the docs. So I prefer to use a more common word for this.

> The transition to Kubernetes Cluster API (CAPI) introduces several noteworthy differences compared to our legacy cluster management infrastructure. These changes aim to enhance flexibility, expand tooling compatibility, and streamline cluster management operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transition to Kubernetes Cluster API (CAPI) introduces several noteworthy differences compared to our vintage cluster infrastructure management. These changes aim to enhance flexibility, expand tooling compatibility, and streamline cluster management operations.
```

### Cluster CRs Packaged as Helm Charts

> CAPI-based cluster configuration is now encapsulated within Helm charts, providing a more controlled and maintainable approach. This approach offers several benefits:
> 
> * **Limited Configuration Exposure:** Only tested and stable configuration options are exposed, ensuring a consistent and reliable cluster experience.
> 
> * **Ease of Configuration Enabling:** Most CAPI features can be easily enabled by updating the Helm chart, enabling rapid adoption of new capabilities.
> 
> * **Inspectable Cluster Assembly:** The Helm chart details clearly outline how the cluster is assembled, providing transparency and diagnostic capabilities.
> 
> * **Documented Configuration Options:** Comprehensive documentation is provided as part of the JSON schema, ensuring easy understanding and reference.
> 
> * **Happa UI-Based Cluster Creation:** The Happa UI streamlines cluster creation from the JSON schema, enhancing user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CAPI-based cluster configuration is now encapsulated within [Helm charts](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/charts/), providing a more controlled and maintainable approach. It has several benefits:

* **Limited Configuration Exposure:** Only tested and stable configuration options are exposed, ensuring a consistent and reliable cluster experience.

* **Ease of Configuration Enabling:** Most CAPI features can be easily enabled by updating the Helm chart, enabling rapid adoption of new capabilities.

* **Inspectable Cluster Assembly:** The Helm chart details clearly outline how the cluster is assembled, providing transparency and diagnostic capabilities.

* **Documented Configuration Options:** Comprehensive documentation is provided as part of the JSON schema, ensuring easy understanding and reference.

* **Happa UI-Based Cluster Creation:** The [Happa UI](https://github.com/giantswarm/happa#happa) streamlines cluster creation from the JSON schema, enhancing user experience.
```

### Configurable Registries with Credentials and Mirrors

CAPI enables the flexibility to specify custom registries with credentials and mirrors, allowing customers to utilize their preferred container repositories. This flexibility enhances the portability and adaptability of customer environments.

### Removal of Cluster Management Operators

> The legacy cluster management operators have been removed due to several limitations and drawbacks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vintage cluster management operators have been removed due to several limitations and drawbacks:
```

> * **Incompatibility with Multi-Version CAPI:** Upstream CAPI doesn't support running multiple versions of operators on the same management cluster, creating operational challenges.

Reviewer: > creating operational challenges.

I don't see this as a limitation TBH, but just a different way to approach it. Also, it seems the CAPI architecture is not ideal.

Author: Yes this is not true. It's the other way around.

> * **Lack of On-Demand Updates:** Operator bug fixes required a full release and upgrade cycle for both GS and customers, hindering timely remediation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Lack of On-Demand Updates:** Vintage operator bug fixes required a full cluster release and upgrade cycle for both Giant Swarm and customers, hindering timely remediation.
```

> CAPI addresses these limitations with a new approach:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cluster API implementation addresses these limitations with a new approach:
```

> * **Cross-Version Compatibility:** New operator versions can manage all previously provisioned clusters, ensuring ongoing support for existing deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Cross-Version Compatibility:** New CAPI operator versions can manage all previously provisioned clusters, ensuring ongoing support for existing deployments.
```

> * **On-Demand Upgrades:** Cluster upgrades are triggered explicitly per cluster, preventing unplanned or unintended upgrades.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **On-Demand Upgrades:** New cluster upgrades are triggered explicitly per cluster, preventing unplanned or unintended upgrades.
```
I don't know about this one, in Vintage upgrades were also triggered by customers, what do you mean?

> * **Enhanced Testing for Operators:** Thorough testing ensures the quality and reliability of the operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Enhanced Testing for Operators:** Thorough testing ensures the quality and reliability of the operators.
```
IMO we need to refresh since this one sounds like before we did not test anything

### Flexible Network Configuration

CAPI introduces greater flexibility in defining network configurations, allowing for more granular control over cluster topology:

> * **Similar Defaults to Vintage:** The default network setup aligns with the familiar Vintage approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Similar Defaults to Vintage:** The default network setup aligns with the familiar vintage approach.
```
for consistency

* **Separate Subnets for Key Components:** The API Load Balancer (LB), Ingress LB, control plane nodes, and worker nodes can be deployed on distinct subnets, enhancing isolation and security.

> * **Transit Gateway Support**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Transit Gateway Support**
```
This is just for AWS, can we generalize it to be cloud-agnostic?

CAPI fully integrates with Transit Gateway, enabling seamless connectivity across multiple AWS accounts and regions. This flexibility expands the range of deployment options.

### Removal of Initiator App

The legacy Initiator app has been removed due to its limitations and potential security risks. Cluster configuration is now solely managed through the configurable options provided by the `cluster-aws` Helm chart. This approach ensures better testing and quality control.

### Private Clusters with Limitations

> CAPI supports private clusters with the following limitations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now with Cluster API, we can offer [`Private Clusters`](https://docs.giantswarm.io/advanced/cluster-management/private-clusters) with some considerations to have in mind:
```

> * **Private Kubernetes API LB:** The Kubernetes API LB can be configured to be private, restricting external access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Private Kubernetes API Load Balancer:** The Kubernetes API Load Balancer (LB) can be configured to be private, restricting external access.
```

* **No Bastion Hosts:** Bastion hosts are no longer used for secure access to private clusters.

> * **HTTP/HTTPS Proxy Required:** A HTTP/HTTPS proxy is necessary for communication with the CAPA API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **HTTP/HTTPS Proxy Required:** An HTTP/HTTPS proxy is necessary for communication with the cluster API.
```
Make it general

> ### Teleport for Secure Cluster Access
> 
> CAPI introduces Teleport as the primary method for secure cluster access, replacing bastion hosts. Teleport offers several advantages:
> 
> * **Removal of Bastion Hosts:** Bastion hosts are no longer required, reducing attack surfaces and simplifying security management.
> 
> * **SSH and kubectl Audit Logs:** Session recording capabilities for SSH and kubectl commands provide comprehensive audit logs.
> 
> * **SSO for SSH and Kubernetes API Access:** Single sign-on (SSO) simplifies access and enhances security.
> 
> * **Private Cluster Enablement:** Teleport enables private clusters without publicly exposed endpoints.
> 
> * **Reduction in VPN Usage:** GS VPN may no longer be needed, except for Grafana, Prometheus, and Happa (if deployed externally).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Teleport for Secure Cluster Access

Our Cluster API implementation introduces [Teleport](https://goteleport.com/) as the primary method for secure cluster access, replacing bastion hosts. The advantages of this approach are:

* **Removal of Bastion Hosts:** Bastion hosts are no longer required, reducing attack surfaces and simplifying security management.

* **SSH and kubectl Audit Logs:** Session recording capabilities for SSH and kubectl commands provide comprehensive audit logs.

* **SSO for SSH and Kubernetes API Access:** Single sign-on (SSO) simplifies access and enhances security.

* **Private Cluster Enablement:** Teleport enables private clusters without publicly exposed endpoints.

* **Reduction in VPN Usage:** Giant Swarm VPN may no longer be needed, except for Grafana, Prometheus, and Happa, in case those are deployed externally.
```

### Cluster IP CIDRs Manually Allocated

> In CAPI, cluster IP CIDRs are manually allocated to new clusters, allowing for more controlled assignment of network resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Cluster API, the cluster IP CIDRs are manually allocated to new clusters, allowing for more controlled assignment of network resources. Now customers can decide to add new IP ranges or customize those proactively. 
```

---

> linkTitle: The new Cluster API
> title: The new Cluster API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: The Managenement API
title: The Management API based on Cluster API
```

* **No Bastion Hosts:** Bastion hosts are no longer used for secure access to private clusters.

* **HTTP/HTTPS Proxy Required:** A HTTP/HTTPS proxy is necessary for communication with the CAPA API.

### Teleport for Secure Cluster Access

CAPI introduces Teleport as the primary method for secure cluster access, replacing bastion hosts. Teleport offers several advantages:

* **Removal of Bastion Hosts:** Bastion hosts are no longer required, reducing attack surfaces and simplifying security management.

* **SSH and kubectl Audit Logs:** Session recording capabilities for SSH and kubectl commands provide comprehensive audit logs.

* **SSO for SSH and Kubernetes API Access:** Single sign-on (SSO) simplifies access and enhances security.

* **Private Cluster Enablement:** Teleport enables private clusters without publicly exposed endpoints.

* **Reduction in VPN Usage:** GS VPN may no longer be needed, except for Grafana, Prometheus, and Happa (if deployed externally).

### Cluster IP CIDRs Manually Allocated

In CAPI, cluster IP CIDRs are manually allocated to new clusters, allowing for more controlled assignment of network resources.

### Multi-Region MCs and IAM Role Access

> CAPI supports multi-region management clusters, enabling the creation of clusters in multiple AWS regions. Additionally, IAM roles can be used to delegate access across AWS accounts, streamlining access management for large deployments.

Reviewer: I would add a `Further reading` section with some follow up links
